Today we are going to talk about one of my absolute all-time favorite pieces of math.
It's incredibly fundamental to engineering, to mathematics itself, to quantum mechanics, but it's something that has a terrible, terrible name.
We call them complex numbers.
And worse than that, the things that bring about complex numbers we call imaginary numbers.
And before we get into any of it, what I want to do is start with kind of a poll, just to poll the audience on seeing what you guys can consider to be, well, real.
What do you consider to exist when it comes to numbers?
So we've already been doing a couple polls in the warm-up animations, but as a serious poll of sorts, one that's actually going to help me see where you're coming from before we begin the lesson here, I just want to ask you a very simple question, okay?
So let's go ahead and poll it up here.
Pull it on up.
And, oh, for whatever reason, it seems like we're having trouble polling this one up.
Hmm.
Okay, there we go.
Took a little delay there.
Among the values 2, square root of 2, square root of negative 1, and infinity, which would you personally consider to really exist, whatever really existing means to you?
So in theory, if you guys go to 3b1b.
co slash live, you should be able to answer this, and then the statistics based on your answers are going to start populating the screen.
We won't know what those answers refer to.
At the moment, all we know is that there's someone who has a lead, another one that's pretty close behind it, and as your answers come in and as the servers kind of digest them, we'll start to see some of the stats here.
If you go to that page, by the way, 3b1b.
co slash live, which redirects to itempool.
com, what you're going to find is at the very top you can ask a question on Twitter, and all that's going to do is basically open up a tweet that's going to have the hashtag in it, lockdown math, and that's the way that we're going to be doing questions to this.
Instead of a live chat, anytime you have a question or a comment that you want to, you know, insert into the lesson and let that be part of the discussion, it's going to be pulled up here, and it looks like we already have one.
This is from Yash Dave, who asks if you could rename the complex numbers and the so-called imaginary numbers to something more intuitive, to a name that conveyed the fact that they have numerous applications in the real world, what would you name them?
I couldn't be happier that you asked, Yash.
So I have one friend who seems very passionate about the fact that we should call them sneaky numbers.
Personally, I'm very fond of trying to connote spinning and rotation, and this is one of the things we'll talk about in today's lesson, is the fact that what we call complex numbers, what we call imaginary numbers, some of the main uses that they have come from very elegant descriptions of how to rotate stuff, and I hope you'll kind of see what I mean as we proceed with that.
So on our poll, asking you guys which numbers you consider to really exist, which is of course a subjective question, there's no right or wrong answer here.
I am genuinely curious, actually, how this breaks down, because it's not at all a strong consensus in one direction.
It seems like we've got three top contenders, and then three that are falling pretty evenly behind that, so let's go ahead and take a look.
What do you consider to really exist when it comes to numbers?
Now, I can imagine which ones might be the top two, but I'm very curious about the fact that there's three all kind of coinciding with each other there, and it looks like I'm getting a little bit of a delay before the reveal, so there's kind of this nice dramatic pause.
I'll tell you, for me personally, I feel like it's very silly to answer anything that's either, that's not all of them or none of them.
I can maybe understand if someone wants to treat infinity as something different, because it's ill-defined.
There's lots of different things that that might mean, but insofar as numbers exist at all, if you consider what a number is to be a real thing, then it would.
.
.
oh man, I can't believe that we're stalling out on this one.
We had fixed it by live stream too, but I guess there's going to be an oscillation between when it works and when it doesn't.
But for me personally, basically, any time that you have a numerical construct that's helpful in the real world, you know, I consider that real.
I would say that if it's something that's actually useful in an application, then it is as real as words are, right?
You're never going to run into an abstract word like happiness out there, but it has a kind of reality in our minds, and things like the square root of two, which you can't express as a fraction, or things like the square root of negative one that don't show up among real normal numbers, you know, even if they might seem a little bit different.
Oh, this is such a shame.
I'm genuinely curious to see what your answers are, but it's not showing up for me, which I suppose means we'll have to move on with the lesson, but this will presumably begin working by the end and we can maybe pull things up again.
So let me go ahead and take that away.
What I'd like to do for you today, basically, is show you the sense in which imaginary numbers are useful, the complex numbers are useful, and from there maybe try to imbue them with a little more reality.
I won't assume that you know what they are yet, it's meant to be a basic primer, but let's just dive right in, okay?
The end, by the way, the very end here, I want to talk about two different trigonometric functions, and this is kind of the thing that we're going to build to, two identities from trigonometry, and I understand that maybe, oh, these complicated identities from trigonometry is not going to be the best way to lure some people into understanding, oh yeah, complex numbers, they're really useful, you're really going to love them.
But I do think it's interesting that you can have a fact that has nothing to do with complex numbers or the square root of negative 1, it's just trigonometry, it's everything we were talking about last time, and you can have facts that are pretty hard to remember.
I remember when I was in school and we learned these addition formulas, that if you want to know the cosine of the sum of two different angles, you know, it's this kind of long thing in terms of cosines and sines of the original two angles, there's this minus sign that would always trip people up, if you do the same for the sign, it looks similar but there's a plus sign, and instead of having cos-cos you have cos-sin, it's something that's very error-prone if you're just trying to memorize it as it is.
However, if you come at it with complex numbers, this is not only much less error-prone, it has a very beautiful meaning and it just falls right out.
So even if you don't necessarily believe in the reality of the square root of negative 1, you at the very least have to admit that it's interesting that it can make other pieces of math useful, that other pieces of math a little bit more understandable too.
And trigonometry is just the tip of the iceberg.
If you talk to anybody who's in engineering, anybody who's going into serious math, they'll tell you that complex numbers are as real a part of their work and their life as real numbers are.
But the starting point looks very strange, okay?
When you start introducing this, the very first thing you do is to say, assume that there's some number i so that i squared is equal to negative 1.
And I think to a lot of students there's maybe one of two possible reactions that you can have here.
One is, no there isn't, right?
Any time I square a number, even if it's negative, if I take negative 5 for example, and I square it, well a negative times a negative is a positive, so I get 25.
Any number that you square, if it's positive, well that just stays positive.
So it seems like no matter what, when I'm squaring numbers, I always get a positive number.
I'm never going to get anything negative.
So this does not exist, no such number.
However, if a mathematician comes and says, oh no no it exists, we've defined it so that that's the case.
I think the other reaction someone can have is, hang on a second, you can do that?
When you have a problem that you can't solve, you can just say, oh I've defined things so that we now magically have a solution.
Okay, next time I'm having trouble with my homework and I don't know what the answer to x is, I will be like, let x be the value defined to be the answer to this question.
So if you're uncomfortable with this, you're definitely not alone.
In fact, Rene Descartes coined the term imaginary for these numbers as a derogatory.
It was meant to make fun of the fact that obviously there is no such answer and it shouldn't be taken as serious math.
And then we stuck with that as a convention and we still call them imaginary numbers, which is genuinely absurd.
But that's not the only weird assumption that we make.
The second weird thing that you do when you start talking about complex numbers is to say, there's not just such a number i, but we're going to give it a home.
Instead of the real number line, which you know all of these numbers we know when we square them, you can't get a negative, what we do is say i lives in a different dimension.
i lives perpendicularly, there's one above and then there's one below, negative i, and you can have negative 2i, you scale it however you want.
Essentially it's proposing that numbers be two-dimensional and that i has a very specific home, one unit perpendicular, uh, perpendicularly above the real number line.
And, okay, if we want to extend our number system, I get it, maybe it's useful to put some kind of number up there, but why i, right?
Why not say infinity is the number that sits one unit above zero, or one divided by zero, or any other problem that you couldn't solve before and you make up an answer to, why should that live there?
What on earth does the idea of a point one unit above the real number line in a separate dimension have to do with squaring to negative one?
So I hope to answer this for you.
At the very beginning, let's just talk about how if you're adding numbers that are two-dimensional like this, the rules are pretty straightforward and it operates essentially the same as vectors, for any of you who might be familiar with vectors.
So let's say, hypothetically, I have a number, oh I don't know, let me draw one here that's going to be 4 plus i, okay?
And then I'm going to take a second number and it's helpful to draw them as vectors, kind of an arrow from the number zero, and this one is going to end up at negative 2 plus 2i.
So what I'm saying is, uh, you take the real number negative 2 and then you move in that perpendicular direction into the extension of our number system, which again, you're kind of asking the students to take a lot on faith here that you're okay to do that, that you're allowed to just pretend that the numbers extend in this direction.
If you take that on faith and you follow, hopefully the fact that it becomes useful helps to justify why we're doing any of this.
So my question for you is simply, what happens when we add these two numbers?
Now, assuming that our question system has not broken down, I should be able to do this as a proper poll.
And let me go ahead, I guess we can first check the previous poll, okay things seem to be working, so we can take a little step back in the lesson, so I'm just genuinely curious, I want to know how you guys answered on this one.
Um, it looks like there's a, there's a back and forth between answers f and d, so f is all of them, saying that all of these should be considered real.
And interesting, d is the one that says you should consider 2 square root of 2 and negative 1, but not infinity, so there's a good contingent of you out there who would just reject infinity as being considered real, but are very comfortable with the square root of negative 1, that's awesome.
And then after that, it looks like c, people who reject the square root of negative 1, fascinating, I actually would have thought that none of them would have come higher than that.
None of them is much lower at a.
Okay, so it looks like we've got a cohort of people who are comfortable with negative 1, a large cohort are uncomfortable with infinity, that's a topic for another day, don't worry about it, and then a number of people who are kind of in that middle ground of maybe not being super comfortable with the idea that negative 1 might be real.
Let's see if we can convince you of the difference of that.
So for our first much more mathematical question, as kind of a warm-up, I just want to ask you to add these two.
Before I've taught you how to add them, make a guess at how it might work, and I hope that it feels pretty straightforward, addition is actually the least interesting part of this, but it is, it's a good thing to know when you're learning about complex numbers.
It's definitely one of those operations that you are going to need to know.
Unfortunately, and you can tell by the fact that I'm stalling and what I'm saying here, it looks like the question is still not loading completely correctly, so I'm going to have a stern word with Cam and Ider behind the scenes who have otherwise built such a beautiful, beautiful interface that's helpful for this kind of back and forth between you guys and me.
I'm going to have a stern word with them behind the scenes, but in the meantime let's go ahead and move forward with the lesson here.
So I guess I can pull it up on the, just on the piece of paper, and you can follow along at home, see what the addition might be.
It turns out to be relatively straightforward.
If you're moving four units to the right and then one unit up, and you want to add the idea of moving two units to the left and then two units up, well you just do each of those one at a time.
I'll go ahead and pull out black here.
The real part is going to be those four to the right, then minus two to the left.
Okay, straightforward enough.
And then the imaginary part is going to be this one unit up and then these two units up, one plus two, times i.
So is that one i plus two i.
And then when you work that out, four minus two is two, one plus two is three.
A nice simple introduction here.
Addition doesn't really have anything complicated going on, which is great.
That means that it's one fewer thing for us to worry about.
What is so complex about complex numbers after all?
Well where everything becomes interesting is when you try to multiply these numbers together.
So with vectors, there's not really any notion of multiplying them to get two vectors back, at least when we're in the 2D plane.
You have some notions like cross products and dot products that in three dimensions can get you something like it.
But the rules end up being very different from that in the number system.
You can't really do algebra.
You can't do things like assume that if two numbers multiply to make zero, then one of them has to be zero.
But complex numbers are going to end up behaving much like the real numbers, so rules from algebra can carry over.
But to understand what that multiplication rule is, I just want to ask you a simple question.
Which is basically, suppose I have the point three, two.
We're not even going to think of it as a complex number per se.
If I just have some sort of coordinate grid and I go to the point with x coordinate three and y coordinate two, what is the 90 degree rotation of this?
If I rotate it 90 degrees and let's say counterclockwise.
I think see counter, counter, geez, writing is difficult.
Counterclockwise.
Okay.
Now what's lovely about this is we can basically just turn our paper to figure it out.
You say okay if it started at three, two and then I rotate 90 degrees counterclockwise, I can just read that off now as being negative two in the x direction and then three in the y direction, if I had rotated the whole plane like that.
So what we've done here is we've taken three, two and then we convert it to negative two, three.
Something which maybe in our original system you know looks like this negative two and then three.
That's going to be the 90 degree rotation.
And what's nice here is that that rule is very simple and it applies to any pair that we might have.
If I took a pair of numbers a comma b okay and then I said where is that going to rotate to if I rotate it 90 degrees it's going to end up by swapping the coordinates b a and then making that first one negative.
That's a 90 degree rotation and a nice gut check here is to say what happens when we do that twice what if we do that same very mechanistic operation again twice and I'm going to go and take this I swap the two coordinates we get a negative b but then that first one becomes negative.
So that was another 90 degree rotation.
Well what's happened here is we've just made both of the coordinates negative and that's reassuring because if I take some point sitting at a b and then I rotate it 90 degrees so this will be my initial 90 degree rotation and then another 90 degrees that's the same as 180 degree rot- oh no I've done that wrong.
That will be the same as a 180 degree rotation which should look like this ignore the other vector that I drew which is just taking both of the coordinates and making them negative negative a negative b okay so that's reassuring this operation that does a 90 degree rotation actually behaves like you would expect it to.
Now why am I asking you this?
Well I'm being told that supposedly I'm allowed to ask you questions again so I'm going to have you do your very first complex product.
Oh look a lot of people did submit answers very good.
Great let's let's grade the complex addition actually let's let's see if it is as straightforward a process as I was hoping it was and see how much explanation is demanded.
Okay so it looks like a majority of you did get the correct answer which is 2 plus 3i.
Very good very good.
52 of you answered simply 2 which would have been the real part of the answer so maybe just the fact that there's some vertical component and you need to still add those vertical components or maybe those of you who answer 2 reject the reality of imaginary numbers so you just don't even acknowledge that vertical component.
Some of you answered negative 2 3 which I guess is just making that's just swapping up whether you're taking 4 minus 2 or 2 minus 4 so that's completely understandable.
We've got 2 plus 3 which is maybe just dropping off the i so I think maybe a lot of like simple errors and entry and you know that happens to all of us especially on tests is sometimes you know what the right answer is but then you you forget a symbol or you swap two so that's all very good.
Let's go ahead and try our very first product though like I said so here because I already talked through one of the questions we're going to go ahead and skip ahead of it we know how to rotate something like 3 comma 2 so I'm not even going to give you time to do that and properly grade it.
Stal stal words words you know they tell me that it's working and yet it's very slow for me to progress forward so you know if I'm not going to have a stern word with them you guys can go at them on twitter too under the same place that we ask questions and just say hey kamineter can't you make the live questions work a little bit better for us?
Okay I think we're finally there.
Everybody ready?
Aha!
Wonderful!
Very simple question I want you to take the number i and I want you to multiply it by 3 plus 2i and even though I haven't really talked about the rules for multiplication what I can say is pretend like it operates just like it does for normal numbers you've got things like the distributive property where you can distribute this throughout and then the defining feature of i is this idea that i squared is negative one that's the only special thing you need to know about that other than that just treat it like it's a normal number okay and then proceed forward with the product.
Wonderful!
Okay so it looks like we've got quite a few of you coming in to answer which is always lovely super exciting for me by the way just how many people are enthusiastic about coming and like getting back to the fundamentals of math in this lockdown and just you know we're going to sit back for an hour and we're going to learn about complex numbers and we're actually going to participate we're actually going to answer questions as you do it rather than sitting in passively watching this is genuinely delightful to me.
Okay this is this isn't necessarily a question I was expecting to divide the audience necessarily so unsurprisingly it looks like we have a very strong majority in one direction hopefully in the correct direction but if not that would that would heavily inform where the lesson should go so that would be quite useful and I think that's probably enough time so I'm going to go ahead and lock the answers into this one okay and it looks like the majority of you answered negative two plus three i which is absolutely correct absolutely correct so there's two ways to think about this okay one of them is to walk forward with the algebra and just do it a little bit mechanistically okay so if we pull ourselves up our sheet if we take i times three plus two i three plus two i it just distributes i times three is going to be three i i times two i is going to be two times i squared by definition i squared is negative one which means that our final answer is going to look like negative two plus three i okay and like I said it looks like a majority of you correctly did that product now it's one thing to just walk through it mechanistically it's another to step back and say what just happened geometrically right because what we just talked through was the fact that if you want to rotate numbers 90 degrees the rule is to swap the two coordinates and then multiply that first one by negative two well look at what's happened here we've got three and two those coordinates have been swapped two is now the real part three is the imaginary part but that two got multiplied by a negative one because i has this defining feature of squaring to become negative one so that should give you some indication that okay multiplying by i has this action of rotating things by 90 degrees maybe that means that it's not a crazy thing to do to geometrically position i at a 90 degree angle with the real number line okay now to really see why that ends up being useful it turns out that if you have that if you have a number that behaves this way it gives you a computational mechanism for all of the other types of rotations that you might want to do that might not necessarily be 90 degrees and to show you why this works i'm going to go ahead and pull up an animation so let's say we have any number z and in this case z is going to be let's see where do i have it z is going to be at two uh plus i great and let's say i want to understand what is multiplying by z due to every other possible complex number well we can go one by one the very first one that's relatively simple is if i ask what is z times one where does it take the number one well z times one is going to be z so we're going to take the number one which i might draw with a little yellow arrow and we're going to rotate and stretch that arrow up to the point where z is great a kind of trivial fact even though it's trivial i'm actually going to take a moment to write that down just so that we can oh no no no that's for that's for later that is randy don't you guys worry about him he'll be coming in in just a moment so i just want to write down three crucial facts that are getting an influence rotation three facts i'll call it three facts about multiplication the first two are going to look simple the third one is going to look innocuous but it ends up being extremely constraining so the first one is that if i have any number z and i multiply it by one will i get the number z back okay geometrically that means with that we stretch and rotate that vector one to get what we want the second one is that if i take z times i from what we just talked about that is the 90 degree rotation what i might write is like rotate by 90 degrees the number z okay so often our animation what does that look like let's see we've already multiplied by one we take i and then it's going to move to whatever the 90 degree rotation point for z itself is okay so two down infinitely many to go okay we know what it does to one we know what it does to i let's see if we can understand what z does to any other possible number well it turns out those two is really all we need to work with if we have the distributive property so the third fact that's going to look kind of innocuous is let's say i take this z and i multiply it by c plus d times i where c and d are just any two numbers okay well this is going to distribute so z times c i'm actually going to write that a little differently i'm going to write it as c times z plus z times di which again i'm going to write in kind of a funny order and write that as d times z i now the idea here is well we know where z is we also know where z times i is so if we're just scaling them up by some other constants that completely constrains where we need to go so let me go ahead and write this down with an example okay let's say that we go back here and i want to know what multiplying by z does to anything i want to tell i want to convince you that it rotates all of the grid in a way that keeps these lines parallel it keeps them evenly spaced keeps them perpendicular to each other it applies this very constrained rule to the whole plane and really just think through any one particular point for this let's say that we have two times negative i okay so you move two units in the positive right direction and then negative one unit in the vertical direction well after the product where that's going to land has to be two times wherever z lands plus negative one times wherever i lands okay and we see that right it's two times this yellow vector and it'll be negative one times the green vector so here even before you actually work out the product we could just read off the fact that z here which looks like it's two plus i multiplied by two minus i must land on the number five okay so i actually want you guys to work this out algebraically because i do think that it's it's edifying to see this work in practice right the fact that we have this geometric rule where we're just kind of stretching and rotating and this corresponds to an otherwise very mechanistic process of expanding out a sum so let's pull back our quiz and i'm going to it's a little bit silly because i've revealed the answer but what i actually want you guys to do here is take a look at the question which says what is two plus i times two minus i and if you have notes right now if you have a pencil and paper which i encourage you to always come to class with i want you to try working it out do the first inside outside last distribution property just to see mechanistically what number ends up popping out from this and then we'll try to see how that squares with the geometric intuition so while you're doing that while you're working that out hopefully on pencil and paper it looks like we've got a question from the audience which is is i the same as i and j the vectors in physics great question actually that's that's a much more interesting question than you might think it is the short answer is no so in physics you often describe the right word direction as i and then the up and down direction as oh we got another one here let me finish answering the question first so in physics you often have this situation where instead of describing the xy plane you describe the right vector as i sometimes i hat and the vertical one as j hat so that's a separate thing that's uh how physicists will describe the right direction up direction for vectors they're not necessarily describing complex numbers totally separate thing what's more interesting actually is that the reason that convention came about uh i believe has to do with a number system that extends even beyond complex numbers it's called the quaternions so with the complex numbers we introduce something called i with the quaternions we introduce j and k these two other numbers both of which also have squares to negative one as it happens and the guy who invented them hamilton he was trying to describe three dimensional space very elegantly and using the purely imaginary directions i j and k became a nice way to do that and i think it's because of that and his attempts to push that forward that the conventions slipped into uh normal physics to just describe those as i and j of course that leads to serious confusion now because if we look at how physicists think of things you know i is in the right direction j is in the vertical direction but with complex numbers i is of course in the vertical direction so it just makes for a whole potential mess um now what was our oh no it looks like they took away the comment oh man there was a comment giving them some sass and then they got embarrassed so they pulled it away well it's on screen it's in there for everyone in the future to see now i think that's probably been enough time to work through a little bit of algebra here so let's go ahead and grade it for everyone to see and it looks like the vast majority of you well i told you the answer so i'm going to assume the vast majority of you are giving the correct answer oh interesting okay so it looks like uh five five is correct and that's the most common answer but then the ones uh where missed were three and four and maybe we can try to understand why three and four would have been common um misconceptions on this one 69 is close 0 i plus 5 is correct but i guess just uh formatted in a weird way um so let's let's go ahead and work this one out by hand okay it's actually you know kind of a pleasant process to multiply complex numbers because it's so deterministic you know what you have to do you know where you start you know where you're going to end and it's really just kind of practicing through it um so two times two that's the first thing that we get and then you take the inside parts i times two so that's going to be 2i and then the outside parts which is negative i times two so that's negative 2i and then the last part which is i times negative i so that'll be negative i squared the defining feature remember is that i squared is the same as negative one which means that the real component of our answer is going to be two times two or four now minus negative one which is plus one so that'll be five and then the imaginary parts cancel each other out that 2i cancels out with a negative 2i so to everyone on the quiz who answered uh five plus zero i uh you know extra credit to you because that actually is 100 correct you're even emphasizing that we're doing this in a complex context so there's no reason that you should have been graded incorrectly on that one um however what's uh what's interesting here those of you who watch the very first lecture might notice the similarity with difference of squares and this is effectively a difference of squares type question and i'm going to guess that those of you who answered three or four it probably came down to if you answered three it would have been because you took this four and you subtracted one rather than subtracting negative one very common mistake no harm in that and then if you answered four it comes from forgetting the fact that i squared can be simplified into a real number so that you know that very much counts for the the real component of your final answer now what's interesting i think is that that process of just walking through the algebra feels very different from this geometric idea that we had before of saying multiplying by z has the action of rotating and stretching things and how it rotates and stretches things is in the way that's necessary to get the number one to sit on the number z and in fact i have a i have a good friend uh ben sparks who is a frequent number file uh contributor that some of you might recognize and i asked him uh to whip up a little geogra thing because he's just a geogra whiz and he actually created basically the complex number equivalent of a slide rule that we can play with here so the way that this is going to work is that i can take the number one and sort of drag it around the plane and as i do the rest of the grid moves in the way that it has to so that the origin stays fixed in place and then everything else kind of stays rigid with the exception of being able to stretch so the way that you might use this is to say let's say we want to know what z times w is well i'm going to stretch and rotate the number one so that it lands on z and then i'm going to follow what happens to w which is now drawn as a orange vector follow what happens to w and as it lands there we can just read off that it ends up at five now even though in practice computationally you would be working it out with the algebra like we just showed having in the back of your mind that this is how they operate helps draw the connection between complex numbers and geometry and also trigonometry which we'll get to in a moment and that turns out to be a much more helpful connection than you might expect so let me go ahead and ask you guys a second question here which is bring back our helpful little friendly quiz given what i just told you about how complex numbers act i want you to guess for me it's okay if you don't know it's okay if you just want to hazard a guess here what is the complex number z so that multiplying by z has the effect of rotating 30 degrees or pi sixth radians counterclockwise okay so you want to number z so that when it's being applied as an action and you're saying what do you do to all the other possible complex numbers the corresponding action is to rotate by pi six radians or 30 uh 30 degrees okay great we've got a lot of answers coming in strong consensus around one of them which is always a good sign let me show you uh how i might draw this out um if i were doing things so i would take a look at um a unit circle of some kind and luckily i have my infinite supply of unit circles sitting right here and i would say okay i know that the action that i want is going to be whatever takes the number one to something that's the 30 degree rotation of the number one that sits up here whatever complex number z this is is going to have the appropriate action and then from there it's all of the trigonometry that you and i were working through last time so let's look at our answers and let's go ahead and lock them into place now before we talk through the explanation and the correct answer in this context is d which is cosine of pi six plus i sine of pi six congratulations to the uh majority of you who correctly answered that very interesting to me actually is that the second most common answer was a which is one plus pi six um and i think that's that's an utterly reasonable guess actually and let's take a look at why so if we go back to our our friendly unit circle the number we were going for is uh like i said sitting pi six radians around and from everything we talked about last time the x component of that is the cosine of pi six this is sort of how cosine is defined and then the y component of that is going to be sine of pi six which means that that number z that we're dealing with okay is going to have an x component of cosine of pi six and then an imaginary component what's in the y direction of sine of pi six great now that second most common answer like i said that's very interesting um if we pull it up it was a which was one plus pi six over i let's take a look at where that sits with a i'll bring in a second cleaner unit circle here like i said i've got an infinite supply they were guessing that it's one and that instead of walking pi six around that you walk to straight up pi six okay which is actually quite close right especially for small angles if you're just walking straight up that's not too different from walking around the circle so if you were to try to use that number um to have the action of rotating by 30 degrees it would have an action of rotating by something that's slightly less than 30 degrees and they would stretch things out by something that's slightly more than a factor of one but it's actually close um which is cool because usually the misconceptions might be like very wrong computationally but the idea that the uh the misconception here was like computationally quite close indicates that maybe the geometric reasoning was lining up with truth which i think is awesome so to give you an illustration of how this might actually be used okay we have a number that has this action of a 30 degree rotation um i want to bring in uh of course a friendly pi creature for us to all think about brandy so let's say that i have a pi creature and i'm i don't know animating a video and at some point for whatever reason i want that pi creature to rotate 30 degrees okay i just want them to rotate there's lots of ways you could do this one of the most common ones in computer graphics is to use matrices which might be a whole topic for another day but a tactic you could use is to use complex numbers and the way this would work is to think of our pi creature as living in the complex plane and then at any kind of computer graphics it's always defined with various points often these control points around it and each one of those control points i would give complex coordinates to so for example let's say the the lower right foot here or i guess stage left our right looks like it has coordinates about one negative three so that would be given the number one minus three i and then from what you guys just told me in answering the question if we want to take that point and then figure out where it gets when we rotate 30 degrees about the origin what i should be multiplying it by is cosine of 30 degrees by sine of 30 degrees and if ever you wanted to be convinced that complex numbers are just as real as real numbers i think one factor to consider is that many programming languages have built into them complex numbers they are considered as real as real numbers so what i might do i could pull up a little python terminal for us to play with and complex numbers if i write something like three negative one are considered a valid type in this case they use j um i think basically because in programming parlance i is often used as an indexing variable so they just go with j instead that actually matches with electrical engineering convention too where they instead of using i for the imaginary number they use j because again i was kind of already used so three minus one j you can just read that as being the same as three minus one i and i can take this number and i can multiply it by other complex values i don't know like five four two if i multiply that it's going to apply the rules of complex multiplication which basically is just foiling it out you can think of this as being the real part is three times four or 12 minus negative one times two because remember that i squared gives us that negative so that's where the 14 comes from and then the imaginary part is going to be that negative one times four which is negative four plus three times two which indeed works out to two so that's kind of cool python seems to be working all of this out for us and what that means remember is let's say that we wanted to rotate our pi creature and let's say i'm just going to focus on one point like his foot sitting here which is at one negative three so let's say i define the foot to be uh sitting at real part one imaginary part negative three uh the rotating number that i want z is what you guys figured out for me we're going to need a little math for this so let's import math always a sign that you're about to have some fun so we're going to call z a complex number whose real part is the cosine well i can't write 30 degrees because this will all be in radians so i'll write it as pi six that's the same thing as 30 degrees and then the y is going to be the sine of that sine of math dot pi over six great so if we look at its components uh the real part is around 0.
866 and the imaginary part should be exactly one half but you know often you get a little numerical error because computers they can't get all the real numbers perfectly there's just not enough information in the universe so they have to have a little bit of an error there some of you might recognize that uh that first part is the square root of three divided by two this is everything we were working out last lecture for computing things like the cosine of pi six now what this means for us is if we take z times foot right or remember foot was that one negative three z times foot should tell us where it goes when you just go through the mechanistic operation of complex multiplication this point should tell us where it lands evidently it's supposed to land at around 2.
3 as a real part and then negative 2.
