 you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you it ends up looking like this, you know, classic exponential curve that curves upward and I can sometimes make it hard to see where it's going or what the overall pattern is so a common trick is to say instead of looking at this y axis that increases linearly as in here I'm going from 5k to 10k, 10k to 15k, 15k to 20k each step is additive, we're adding 5000 instead use a y axis where each step is multiplicative so you're going from 10 to 100, 100 to 1000, 1000 to 10, 10,000 all of these are increases by multiplying by 10 and what you can say is the y axis is now plotting not the total number of cases but the logarithm of the total number of cases and this actually makes it kind of easier to see on a plot if you wanted to project out what that trend would do and, you know, it's a little bit of a naive model to say oh it's going to grow exactly exponentially but in the early phases of something like this that is what it is so I kind of fast forward in the animation I made for that video and what's interesting is if back then I think I posted it on March 6th if you just found a line of best fit and you stretched it out and you said when is that line going to cross a million which because the y axis is growing with multiplicative steps each time that you step up you're multiplying by 10 so even if it might seem like the 20,000 cases or so that it was back then is very far from a million you know when you understand logarithmic scales it actually didn't seem that far it was only 30 days away if you naively just drew out that line and in fact fast forward to around April 5th which is when that would have predicted we hit a million cases outside China that's pretty much the day that it happened I think plus or minus a day I don't remember exactly but it was right in that neighborhood because I remember thinking wow it was kind of a naive model for the video to even use and it's shocking that it matched so exactly thankfully since then the growth has stopped being exponential so if you look at it on a logarithmic plot instead of going up in a straight line it starts to taper off but point being anytime that you're coming across something in nature or even in a man-made construct where what's natural to think about are multiplicative increases logarithms come in to help you so let's go ahead and think about what these actually are how are they defined and actually there was a question asked on Twitter right before we started that I think hits this very perfectly so Max 182 asks us additions inverse is subtraction multiplications inverse is division but I never truly understood if exponentiations inverse was nth rooting or logarithms if either one could be you know if either one could really be called that way can they that is such a fantastic question Max and I think it comes down to the fact that with addition and multiplication you're not or I'll just draw it out for you actually this is going to be easiest if we have some kind of exponential relationship let's say 10 to the power 3 is equal to 1000 there's three different numbers at play here we're showing a relationship between the 10 the 3 and the 1000 and aside from writing it with an exponent there's two other ways we could write that same relationship we could also say that the cube root of 1000 is equal to 10 this is asking 1000 what number raised to the third is equal to 1000 that's sort of what the cube root is asking and another way that you could phrase the exact same thing is to say the log base 10 of 1000 is equal to 3 three different notations the same exact relationship a while ago I made this video about an alternate possible notation that would center in the idea that you think of this relationship between the three numbers with a triangle where you'd have our 10 sitting down here the power sitting at the top 10 to the third and the thing they equal sitting to the lower right and whenever you want to talk about a function or an operation between two of these numbers you indicate which one of them you're leaving out so to write 10 cubed we would include the 10 on the lower left the 3 on the upper right and then we leave out that bottom one so this is indicating that we're taking a power 10 cubed for that radical what you would say is we know what's on the bottom right something to some power equals 1000 we even know what the power is something cubed equals that 1000 but the thing we don't know is on the bottom left that is the sense in which radicals are an opposite of exponentiation where if the thing you don't know instead of being on that bottom right is on the bottom left but what logarithms are it's an inverse in another sense because what it's saying is in this triangle relationship we know the base it's 10 we know the power that it should be a 1000 but the thing we don't know is what's in that exponent so to answer your question maybe even more briefly we could say that 10 to the x the inverse of that the inverse is the log base 10 of y of some other variable whereas if you're taking x to the 10th some unknown raised to a power the inverse of that is going to be the 10th root of some other value and on the triangle it's basically asking which of the things do we consider to be a variable so are you considering that lower right to be a variable quantity are you considering that top to be a variable quantity and what is the unknown but I really liked this idea of making explicit how we have three totally different notations for the same exact fact one of them you're using relative positions of the numbers one of them we introduce a new symbol this radical and one of them we introduce a new word log so these three syntactically different ways to communicate the same idea seemed wrong and so I made this video about an alternate possible notation and while I don't necessarily think that we should teach logarithms with this triangle because convention is what it is so it's better to start getting people used to the usual expression what I do like about it and starting off with it is when you see and think about this triangle it's really emphasizing that what the log wants to be is that exponent every time that you see log of some value you should think in your mind okay whatever this number is it really wants to be an exponent it wants to be an exponent and we'll see more of what that means as we go on okay so every time you see a log it wants to be an exponent this value three and more specifically it should be an exponent sitting on top of whatever that base is now in terms of convention for the first part of this video I'm just going to be using log without a base written on it to be the shorthand for log base 10 because log base 10 will be the most intuitive thing out there you should know that often in math the convention instead is that log without anything might mean log base e there's also another notation for that ln for natural log we're going to talk all about the natural log next time so don't worry too much about that right now and there's also yet another convention often if you're in a computer science setting log without any added sugar to indicate what it is defaults to meaning log base 2 so this can sometimes be a source of confusion but it basically depends on what discipline you're in in math not moth math people really like a base of e we'll see why next lecture in I don't know I'll say engineering but really it's anything where you want good intuition with our normal base 10 number system log means log base 10 and if you're curious often in computer science settings log base 2 comes up all the time so like I said in the back of your mind if you're trying to think of some of these properties just resting on the idea that log counts the number of zeros at the end of a number that can get you a really far away so we're going to start going through a couple of these properties and I want to do this just with a set of practiced examples so we'll transition away from the poll and this time to the first proper question and the question asks you which of the following is true a the log of 1000 times x is equal to 3 times the log of x and remember we're using the convention that it's base 10 log b log of 1000 times x equals log of x cubed c log of 1000 times x equals 3 plus the log of x d log of 1000 times x equals 3 to the power of log of x and e none of the above and remember like I said earlier we should fully expect that all of those people at the beginning who said they understand logs well they're going to be answering immediately they're going to be answering correctly but if you're someone who doesn't don't let that intimidate you when you're looking at a problem like this one what I would encourage you to do is just plug in various powers of 10 and think in terms of the idea that the log function counts the number of zeros so I'll give you a little moment to think about that so great ok so go ahead and grade it and as always if that's faster than what you're comfortable with know that it's only because I want to proceed forward with the lesson so in this case the correct answer comes out to be log of 1000 times x is the same as taking 3 plus the log of x and now let's think about that for a moment and like I said when you're just getting started with them I think the best thing to do is just be comfortable plugging in various numbers and the best numbers to plug in are the ones that are already powers of 10 so if you're asking something like log of 1000 times x well I don't know let's just plug in something for x log of 1000 times 100 ok well we know how many zeros are going to be in the final answer here well 1000 times 100 is 100,000 we already intuitively have this idea that when we multiply two powers of 10 we're just taking the zeros the three zeros from that 1000 the two zeros from that 100 and we're putting them next to each other so it should be five total zeros but if you really reflect not just on how did the number turn out but why did it turn out that way it was the three zeros from that 1000 plus the two zeros from that 100 which we could also write by saying the number of zeros in 1000 plus the number of zeros in 100 so this idea that a logarithm of the product of two things is the sum of the logarithms of those two things in the context of powers of 10 that's just communicating what's already a super intuitive idea for a lot of us if you take two powers of 10 and you multiply them you just take all of their zeros and kind of cram them onto each other so the way I've written things out here is actually indicative of a slightly more general fact which is going to be our very first property of logarithms which is that if we take the log of a times b it equals the log of a plus the log of b now any time you see one of these logarithm rules if you find yourself squinting your eyes or you're a little bit confused by how to remember it just plug in examples I'm being redundant, I'm saying this a lot but it's because I think it's very easy to forget once you're swamped in the algebra itself and you're sitting on some kind of test and it's just got a lot of symbols to remind yourself you are okay to just plug in some numbers that's a fine thing to do and often it's a great way to yield intuition so in this case saying log of a times b and breaking it apart we could just think oh that log of 100 times 1000 which is 5 there's 5 zeros in it breaks up in terms of the number of zeros in each given part great, wonderful so carrying that intuition further let's try another practice problem and again if you know it great you'll be able to answer it fine but maybe think not just what is the answer but how would I explain this answer to someone or how would I try to get a student to come to this answer on their own without me having to tell them what the answer is so there's two potential audience members there's those who are interested in the lesson itself and then those who are interested in the meta lesson so our question asks again which of the following is true so again take a moment to answer as people do answer we'll start to see them roll in and if you are struggling to think of where to even start just plug in some powers of 10 and see what intuition you might get from it so alright so it looks like just about everybody is landing on one particular answer hopefully it's the right answer like I said all to be expected so let's go ahead and see if our majority ended up correct and they did so the correct answer here is a which it looks like 4000 of you got congratulations telling us that log of x to the power n is equal to n times log of x so again let's say that you're trying to teach this to someone or if you're trying to come to grips with what it means yourself I think a fine place to start is plugging something in and in this case for log of x to the power n let's just try it with 100 to the power 3 and you could try with other ones to see if the patterns you're doing actually work but if you're thinking it through not in terms of simply seeing what the answer is but trying to think of why the answer turned out that way sometimes one example will do because 100 cubed we can think of that as taking well that's 3 copies of 100 I'm taking 3 copies of 100 and when I multiply all that out and I think of log as counting the number of zeros we say oh it's going to be some number that just has six zeros on it that's what it means to take 100 times 100 times 100 I can just think of grouping all of those zeros together to get a million so this number is going to be 6 but if we think actually why was it 6 not just that's the number of zeros inside the million where that 6 came from is that we had 3 copies of that 100 and each of those 100 had 2 different zeros so that way it's a more general way you can think about it where if instead of taking 100 cubed we were looking at 1000 cubed or 1000 to the n or x to the power n you can think that it's whatever that value of n was the number of copies we were multiplying in times the number of well let's see it's not x times the number of zeros they were in whatever we substituted for x which in this case was 100 so if instead I had taken something like log of 10,000 to the power n this would be the same as taking n copies of that 10,000 counting the number of zeros in each one of them which is 4 so it would be n times 4 and of course the general property that most of you correctly answered is that you have this lovely little effect where when you see the log of something raised to a power that little power hops down in front of it and you just have log of what was on the inside now one of the maybe most important implications of that I don't know if you'd call it an implication or if you'd call it a restatement of the definition if I'm taking log and I'll just re-emphasize it's base 10 of 10 to the power n we can kind of think of that little n as hopping down in front and becomes n times the log base 10 of 10 which is of course 1 this expression you can think of as either counting the number of zeros at the end or more generally it's asking 10 to the what equals 10 and the answer is simply 1 which is very reassuring because another way that you could go back and just read this original expression is saying 10 to the what equals 10 to the n oh well the answer is n. Now with every given logarithm property that we have so in this case we just found one log of x to the power n involves that n hopping in front there's always going to be a mirror image exponential property and that's another way that we can help to get ourselves a little bit of intuition for these so let me just cover up some of the future properties we're going to get to here try to hide where we're going what we just found raising something to the n that hops in front this corresponds to the exponential property that if I take 10 to the x and raise that whole thing to the power n that's the same as taking 10 to the n times x and this gets us to another intuition that you might have for logarithms which is they kind of they're like exponentiation turned inside out and here's what I mean by that the thing sitting on the inside of the log if I'm taking log of a you should be thinking of that as the whole outer expression for something that's exponential in this case the a the thing on the inside corresponds to 10 to the x the output of the function whereas the entire thing itself the log of a corresponds to what's on the inside over here just what's the exponent of the 10 so wherever you see a log expression here you should be thinking that plays the role of an exponent on the right side and every time you see a exponential the entire 10 to the x expression the whole outer component on the right side that corresponds to something that's sitting on the inside of one of the logs and we saw this above the idea that when we're multiplying on the inside that's adding on the outside well if logs kind of turn exponentials inside out that's telling us that multiplying on the outside multiplying the outputs of the function is the same as adding on the inside because each of these logs like log a and log b is playing the role of the x and the y in the expression on the right okay so with that let's keep playing let's just do a couple more of these and see how many of these properties that we can build up an intuition for so this last one very nice thinking of exponents hopping down the next one is something that might look a little bit weird to those who are not necessarily familiar with logarithms but again plug in some numbers to gain some intuition for it and we'll give it a little bit more a moment to pull up which of the following is true log base a of b is negative log base b of a log base a of b is 1 divided by log base b of a log base a of b is 1 minus log base b of a log base b of a is log base a of 1 divided by b or none of the above so it's asking what happens when we swap the base with what's sitting inside of the logarithm and I'll just give you a minute or two to answer that so let's go ahead and grade things and in this case the correct answer of the choices we have comes out to be b that the log base a of b involves taking 1 divided by the log base b of a again let's think this through both in terms of an example and then in terms of a more proofy systematic reason why it should be true so if we're swapping our bases let's just start off with our good old friend log base 10 and let's plug in a nice power of 10 like 1000 counting the number of zeros we get 3 so let's try swapping the bases and see what this should mean log base 1000 of 10 ok well what is this asking? maybe you think of drawing a little triangle saying something like we know 1000 to something is equal to 10 1000 to the what equals 10? well if 10 cubed is 1000 that is the same thing as saying 10 is equal to 1000 raised to the one third doing the inverse here involves the multiplicative inverse of the exponent and the way that pans out is that it looks like 1 divided by 3 and that 3 corresponds to the log base 10 of 1000 it's 1 divided by the log base 10 of 1000 so more generally you might guess based on this single example that when we swap the base with what's on the inside it corresponds to taking 1 divided by what's on the outside there and again you can think this through in terms of looking at the corresponding exponential rule now what happened to my lovely little log and exponentials? wonderful so again let's hide where some of the things some of the other properties that we'll get to here and I'll keep it in the same order I had it before here I was thinking that having it pre-written could keep me a little bit cleaner than usual but maybe it just involves playing this weird game of paper cutting shuffling around so what we just found log base b of a if you swap those it's the same as dividing by 1 what this corresponds to off an exponential land is if you take b to some power and say that that equals a that's the same statement as saying that a to the inverse of that power equals b again it's kind of helpful to take a moment and think of the logarithms as turning things inside out the expression log base b of a is playing the role of that x and the expression log base a of b is playing the role of whatever sits on top of the a and then symmetrically the whole expression b to the power x is playing the role of the inside on the left it plays the role of the a and the whole expression a to the power of something plays the role of what's sitting inside the log base a there so you can see just by plugging in some examples and by corresponding it to the exponential rules we can already think through three different logarithm rules which if they were just handed down as pieces of algebra to be memorized you know you could memorize them but it's very easy for them to kind of slip out of your head and it's also very easy to get frustrated by the task at hand but you might want to remind yourself that the reason we care about these sorts of things is understanding the rules of logarithms helps us do math in context where it's like a virus growing where from one day to the next from one step to the next things tend to grow multiplicatively understanding the rules of logarithms helps you to get a better feel for that kind of stuff so before we do a nice real world example of what that can look like let me just do one more quiz question in this vein to ask about properties of logarithms one last one before we transition to a little bit of a real world example get rid of what we had here and now which of the following is true? log of a plus b is the same as log of a plus log of b log of a plus b is equal to log of a times log of b log of a plus b is equal to one divided by log of a plus log of b or log of a plus b is equal to one divided by log of a times log of b or none of the above ah and now we don't have as much consensus do we? very interesting we've got a horse race between two so I will give you a moment to think this through while people are answering actually I have a little question for the audience so you know I was just talking about how we might think in terms of multiplicative growth and that doesn't just have to be powers of 10 we could also do something like powers of 3 or if you're going from 1 to 3 to 9 to 27 to 81 all of these we could say that the log base 3 of these numbers just grows in nice little steps so log base 3 of 1, 3 to the what equals 1? the answer is 0 in general the log of 1 no matter the base will be 0 log base 3 of 3, 3 to the what equals 3 is 1 similarly log base 3 of 9 is 2 you might wonder what my question is but it'll help to draw all of these out and for my own pleasure here let me just write out one more log base 3 of 81 is 4 now I've heard that ostensibly if you ask a child let's say around like 5 or 6 years old what number is halfway between 1 and 9? you say what number is halfway? their instincts for how to answer are logarithmic whereas our instincts tend to be more linear so we often think 1 and 9 you've got a bunch of evenly spaced numbers between them 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and if you go right halfway in between you'll land on 5 but if you're thinking in terms of multiplicative growth where to get from 1 to 9 it's not a matter of adding a bunch of things but you're growing by a certain amount you grow by a factor of 3 then you grow by another factor of 3 supposedly a kid's natural instinct lines up with saying 3 and supposedly this also lines up with if you have anthropologists studying societies that haven't developed counting systems and writing in the same way that modern societies have they'll answer 3 for this so my question for the audience if any of you watching right now have access to a small child let's say in the range of 5 years old see if you can go ask them what number is halfway between 1 and 9 and if you can let us know on twitter what the child says what their actual answer is because I don't know why I'm just a little bit skeptical of whether that actually pans out in practice I understand this is not a super scientific way to do it asking people watching a youtube live stream to survey their own children and then tweet the answer but for my own sake it would be interesting to see some kind of validation there back to our question this is the first one that doesn't seem to have a huge consensus in one direction let's go ahead and grade it to see what the answer turns out to be great, ok, so 2400 of you correctly answered that it's none of the above that log of a plus b doesn't satisfy any of these nice properties and in general unless we're going to be working with certain kinds of approximations especially when the natural log comes into play, we might talk about this next time adding the inputs of a logarithm is actually a very weird sensation it's a very weird thing to do and to get a sense of that weirdness, plug in some powers of 10 if I ask you log of a plus b what you might start thinking is, ok let me just plug in some examples like 10,000 and 100 and I ask myself if I do this zero counting function of what's in that input how many zeros are in it? but it's weird because when we add 10,100 well we're no longer at a clean power of 10 and ok that's fine, you know, often you're taking logarithms of things that aren't clean powers of 10 but it becomes very strange to ask how you express this in terms of log of 100 which was 2, and log of 10,000 which was 4 because if you look at log of 10,100 it's asking 10 to the what is equal to 10,100 you might say, I don't know, it's going to be a little above 4 because it's kind of close to 10,000 so the best you might guess here is oh this is going to be something that's kind of like the log of 10,000 but that just feels like a coincidence based on the two numbers that we happened to put in there's not a nice systematic reason coming there so maybe you guess, oh if the numbers a and b are very different it's kind of close to whatever the maximum of them is but it's very bizarre and most importantly for the sake of the quiz if you just look at the options that it's giving you if you try this out with any particular numbers you'll find that none of those actually work so all is good sometimes you get something that looks like it's going to be a nice property but it doesn't end up being a nice property and I also think that's important rather than just finding yourself only working with the various log of a times b or log of x to the power n these things that have a nice rule sometimes you're out in the mathematical wild you're working on some problem you have a logarithm expression and it's adding things in the input and you want to be able to have familiarity with the fact that that's kind of weird that you're not going to be able to simplify but if you hadn't thought about that before you might wonder, oh is there just some formula that I haven't seen before so with all of that let me go ahead and take a couple questions from the audience before we transition to a different sort of example so it looks like Uma Sherma asks can the base be zero? that's an interesting question can the base of a logarithm be zero? in terms of our triangle we might think of that as saying zero to some kind of power x is equal to some other value y this is something that we could write either by saying zero to the x equals y or we could write the same thing by saying log base zero of y is equal to x zero to the what equals x now the issue here is that zero to anything ends up being zero so if we're just going to be thinking of log base zero of y for any other input y you want to input something like one or two or pi anything you might want you're asking the question zero to the what is equal to one or two or pi or whatever number you might have there and there's just not going to be an answer so at best you could try to say oh yes log of zero it's a perfectly valid function it's only defined on the input zero but even then you'd have trouble trying to finagle what you want there because saying zero to the what equals zero it's like anything applies to it so your arm is going to be twisted behind your back however you want to make that work and it corresponds to the fact that the exponential function with base zero is entirely zero it doesn't map numbers in a nice one to one fashion onto each other so that's a great question can you have a log base zero now back to the idea of where these things come up in the real world one example I kind of like is the Richter scale for earthquakes so the Richter scale gives us a quantification for how strong an earthquake is and it can be anything from very small numbers up to very large numbers I think the largest earthquake ever measured and this is just a chart that comes from Wikipedia was a 9.5 and to appreciate just how insane that is it's worth looking at the relationship between what these numbers mean and then something like the equivalent amount of TNT some sort of measure of how much energy there is in it and then what we can try to do here is see if we can get an expression for the Richter scale number in terms of the amount of energy and why logarithms would be a natural way to describe this so the key to focus on is as we're taking steps forward how much do things increase so for example if we go from two well in this case it doesn't show us where three is so maybe we think of taking a step from two up to four which is kind of like taking two steps what does that do in terms of the amount of energy well it looks like it takes us from one metric ton of TNT which is I guess a large bomb from World War II and it takes us up to a kiloton, a thousand times as much which is a small atom bomb so just two steps on the Richter scale going from an earthquake of magnitude two to an earthquake of magnitude four takes us from large bomb from World War II up to the nuclear age so that is noteworthy and the first clean step that we get is going from four to five at least in terms of what this chart is nicely showing us and evidently a single step up from four to five corresponds to going from one kiloton to 32 kilotons and that was evidently the size of the city destroying bomb that landed on Nagasaki so this is maybe one thing that can be counterintuitive about logarithmic scales if you're just hearing in the news the difference between oh there was an earthquake that was a 4.0 versus an earthquake that was a 5.0 it's easy to think yeah four and five, those are pretty similar numbers but evidently in terms of TNT amounts that corresponds to multiplying by 32 to get from one to the next and going from two to four was evidently multiplying by about a thousand and the only reason that's bigger is because here our chart wasn't showing what three was so we were taking two steps and you can verify for yourself that if you take a step of 32 and then you multiply by another 32 that's actually pretty close to a thousand so the idea that additive steps on the Richter number correspond to multiplicative steps in the TNT seems to suggest that something logarithmic is at play here and it's a little interesting to just keep going here and say how much does this grow partly because of the world phenomena it's describing yes not a huge surprise that as we take another step it's multiplying by about 32 again but reining that in to our intuitions that's the difference between 32 kilotons, a small atom bomb and then one megaton which we might think of as not small atom bomb, Nagasaki atom bomb which I guess is 32 of the Nagasaki atom bombs for one megaton that is evidently the magnitude of the double string flat earthquake in Nevada USA 1994 I didn't know what that was, thanks Wikipedia in terms of frequencies by the way I also looked these up evidently ones that are less than two those happen all the time, there's like 8000 of those per day but as soon as we're in the realm of atom bombs things like 3.5 and 4 those evidently also happen quite frequently somewhere on the earth there's around 134 of those happening somewhere every day who knew? but as we get even more intense into this 5 and 6 range which, you know, we're well above the atom bomb scale now, oh, we're only merely at around 2 per day and, you know, I'm sure that a geologist could come in and explain why we all shouldn't be super worried about the fact that there's two atom bomb equivalent disruptions to the earth's crust happening every day but presumably it's particularly rare for those to be concentrated on some spot like a city where lots of people live now just verifying our thought that each step involves a growth of 32 let's look at what the step from 6 up to 7 looks like and here it's giving us lots more examples in between maybe giving the illusion that that's a bigger step than it actually is and indeed that's the difference between 1 megaton and 32 megatons so that's multiplying by 32 one of the things I found most interesting on this chart by the way was look at how far we have to go before we get to the largest nuclear weapon that's ever actually been tested this was height of the cold war, the Tsar bomb that was 50 megatons and I believe they actually had original plans to have a 100 megaton bomb but talked themselves down from that 50 megatons, we're talking, start off at that 32 kilotons of the Nagasaki bomb multiply by 32 to get a megaton multiply by another 32, right, so we're talking about a thousand times the strength of the World War II ending explosion and you're still not at the 50 megatons of what humanity is capable of and that is evidently the Java earthquake of Indonesia so 7.0 is not just a little bit bigger than 6.0, it's a lot bigger and the point here of course is just that when you have a scale giving you multiplicative increases it's worth appreciating that what look like small steps can actually be huge steps in terms of the energy implied or the absolute values implied here so when we're thinking about the fact that there was ever a 9.5 that actually seems absurd given that it's only in the 7.0 range that we're talking about the largest thermonuclear weapon ever put out and this is indicative of one area where logarithms tend to come about it's when humans want to create a scale for something that accounts for a hugely wide variance in how big things can be so in the case of size of earthquakes you can have things from what happens just all the time around the Earth, the size of a large hand grenade and you want that to be on your scale and something to think about ranging all the way up to the largest disruption that we've seen in human history and in order to have that in a way that you're not just writing a whole bunch of different digits in your numbers for one case and a whole bunch of different, a smaller number of digits for your number in another case it's nice to take logarithms and then just put that on a single scale that basically squishes those numbers between 0 and 10 you see something very similar going on with the decibel scale for music that one actually works a little bit differently where every time you take a step up of 10 decibels that corresponds to multiplying by 10 so rather than a step of 1 multiplying by 10, it's a step of 10 that multiplies by 10 so that kind of makes the math of it a little bit screwy but the idea is the same, that if you're listening to a sound that's 50 decibels versus 60 decibels it's a lot quieter in terms of the energy being transmitted and going from, what would it be, 60 to 70 or 70 to 80 those steps, from 60 up to 80, that involves multiplying the amount of energy per square area by a factor of 100 so every time you see a logarithmic scale, know in your mind that that means whatever it's referring to under the hood grows by a huge amount this is again why we saw a lot of logarithmic scales used to describe the coronavirus outbreak so how might you describe a relationship like this where every time you grow the Richter scale number by 1, you're multiplying by 32 well, we could think in terms of a log with base 32 I could say if I take the log of, I'm just going to call r, the number for the Richter scale I might think of this as log base 32 and that's going to correspond to, no no no, I'm doing this wrong that's not the thing that's logged we take the log base 32 of the big number, of the TMT number, something that was like 1 gigaton or 1 megaton it's 1 million tons the log base 32, that should correspond to the Richter scale number but there might be some kind of offset, so we might say that there's some kind of constant s that we're adding to this Richter scale number and this expression is exactly the same excuse me for going off the bottom there this expression is exactly the same as saying 32 to the power of some offset times our Richter scale number which is the same as taking 32 to that offset, which itself is just some big constant, times 32 to the Richter scale number so you might think of this as just being some constant times 32 to the power of the number you see so this way of writing it really emphasizes the exponential growth of it that if this is what corresponds to the TMT amount that you see as you increase that r step by step you're multiplying by 32 but another way of communicating the exact same fact is to take the log base 32 of whatever that amount is alright, now the next thing I want to talk about is how we don't always have to worry about how to compute logs of different bases and it's a little weird here that we were talking about log base 32 I referenced earlier how mathematicians really like to have a log with base e computer scientists really like to have a log with base 2 and it turns out for computational purposes or for also thinking about how these things grow if you have one log, if you're able to compute one type of log, whether that's base 10, base 2, base e you can compute pretty much anything else that you want okay, now to get our intuitions in that direction, let's turn back to our quiz and go to the next question and I believe that this question is the most I don't know, this is a halfway reasonable question, this should be nice this is just going to get us prepared to translate from base 2 contexts to base 10 contexts and it's also a good intuition for understanding powers of 2 to have in general the relationship that it has with powers of 10 because it's this lovely kind of coincidence of nature that these two sort of, well you'll see what I mean, they play nicely with each other so our question asks, given the fact that 2 to the 10th is 1024, 1024 which is approximately 1000, okay, so you can if you're being a little bit loose with your numbers and you're just making approximations 2 to the 10th, basically 1000, which of the following is closest to being true? log base 2 of 10 is approximately 0.3 log base 2 of 10 is approximately, sorry, log base 10 of 2 is approximately 0.3 log base 2 of 10 is approximately 1 third or log base 10 of 2 is approximately 1 third okay, which of these is closest to being true based on the fact that 2 to the 10th is essentially 1000? I'll give you a little moment for that log base 2 of 10 is approximately 0.3 interesting that we've got kind of a split on this one so I'm wondering if they're going to be numerically pretty similar or if they're going to be conceptually similar or if there's even a difference between those two so since answers keep rolling in, I'm going to give this a little bit more time so anyone at home watching, hopefully you already have a pencil and paper out to be noodling through these yourself, that is the spirit of the lectures that we're doing if you don't, now is the time to take out a pencil and paper and see if you can think this one through and write it out some of the problems that we're going to build to here definitely will require pencil and paper so now is as good a time as any and if you're watching this in the future, even if you can't participate in the live poll I really do think it's a lot of fun to kind of throw your own hat into the mix even if it's not going to contribute to one of the numbers that you see growing on the screen I'll give you a little bit more time here as the answers seem to continue rolling in so now is the time to take out your pencil and paper and write it out so now is the time to write your own paper and write it out so now is the time to write your own paper and write it out so now is the time to write your own paper and write it out so now is the time to write your own paper and write it out so now is the time to write your own paper And then I'm ready to move on to the google Okay, so I'll go ahead and grade it now and let's see how people did on this one. So the correct answer is B, which is that the log base 10 of 2 is approximately 0.3, and it looks like 1850 of you correctly got that, so congratulations. But the close contender, not at all a unanimous decision here, looks like it was D, which is that the log base 10 of 2 is around one third. So that's good, they're very numerically similar, right? That it's either 0.3 or around one third, which is 0.3333 repeating. But the question was asking which one is closest to being true, and let's see how we can think about this. So it points out that you have a power of 2, which is 1024, awfully close to a power of 10, about 10 cubed. And the question is how we can leverage this to understand something like log base 2 of 10, or log base 10 of 2, as we saw earlier, those are just the reciprocals of each other. So what does this mean? If log base 2 of 10 is equal to x, that's the same thing as saying 2 to the x is equal to 10, right? It's asking us 2 to the what equals 10. So what we have here is an expression 10 cubed is approximately equal to 2 to the 10. So what I might write out is we know that 2 to the 10, instead of writing it as a 10, I'm going to write that 10 as 2 to the x, where x is the number such that 2 to the x is equal to 10. So if that cubed is the same as 2 to the 10, this is, I'll just write out the full details, the same as saying 2 to the 3 x is equal to 2 to the 10. And exponentiation is a nice one-to-one function, so it's okay to just say whatever's going on in the input, if the outputs are the same, the inputs must also be the same. You can't do that with every function. People seem to think you can do that with any function, but you just can't. And what that means is that x is about 10 thirds, okay? Which, great, so log base 2 of 10 is about 10 thirds. So if we looked at our answers though, that's not actually any of the options. We've got various things asking log base 2 of 10 being around 0.3 or 1 third, so it looks like instead we should try to re-express this as log base 10 of 2. And well enough, what we saw earlier is that log base 2 of 10, we could also say log base 10 of 2 is just 1 over that amount, 1 over x. And you can see this pretty easily by writing 2 is equal to 10 to the 1 over x. If we're asking 10 to the what equals 2, the answer is 1 over what we just got there. So log base 10 of 2 is 1 divided by this amount, which is 3 tenths, which is 0.3. Great. So this is kind of a nice constant to think about because there's this wonderful pattern that happens when we're looking at powers of 2. So if I ask what is the log base 2 of 1000, like we just saw, it's approximately the case that 2 to the power 10 is equal to 1000. And because we're doing things in logs, I'm just going to be writing it in that way. A log 2 of 1000 is approximately 10. Similarly, log base 2 of a million, well let's see, if we have to multiply 2 by itself about 10 times to get to 1000, we should have to multiply it by itself around 20 times to get up to a million. And indeed, log base 2 of a million is approximately 20. It's a little bit smaller, but this is kind of a nice approximation to have in your mind. And then similarly, you'll see why I'm writing out this as a pattern in just a moment. If we wanted to go up to a billion, saying how many times do I have to multiply 2 by itself to get to a billion, this is about 30. And any computer scientist out there who's thought about, you know, just how much is a kilobyte or a megabyte or a gigabyte, they'll be familiar with the idea that powers of 2 are nice and close to these powers of 10. Or more specifically, powers of 1000. Now what I want to do is just write all of the same things with log base 10, not approximately equal to, this is actually equal to 3. Log base 10 of 1000 is equal to 3. Log base 10, well you tell me, what's log base 10 of a million? It's counting the number of zeros, it ends up being about 6. And log base 10 of a billion, counting the number of zeros, it ends up being 9. Now the reason I wanted to write all of this out is to just emphasize an interesting pattern here, which is we're just growing by these increments, right, as we go from 1000 to a million to a billion with log base 2, we're stepping up by steps of 10. But when we're playing the same game with 10, we're stepping up by these increments of 3. So there's this nice relationship. And in fact, for all of them, to go from log base 2 to log base 10, it seems like we're just multiplying by .3. So 10 times .3 is 3. 20, we scale down by that same amount. 30, we scale down by that same amount. Okay? Now this is an intuition worth remembering. If you have your numbers described with one base, it's basically the same as describing them with another base, but there's some rescaling constant. Okay? Now the next question is going to start getting us at that direction, but it's going to be framed in a way that just looks like a whole pile of algebra. And again, I will encourage you to plug in numbers if you want to, to gain a little intuition for it. So as our third to last question, this will be a long lecture. We have which of the following is true? And then just a whole pile of various possible ways to combine log base c of b times log base c of a? Does that equal log base b of a? And rather than me reading them out to you, I'll just let you look through them, plug in some numbers. I'll give you a meaningful time on this one because it's not obvious unless you're already familiar with logarithms, and it's worth thinking through a little bit. We have an outstanding question from the audience, which is, does the bar length of the pole use some kind of log function? And helpfully, it looks like Ben Eater has gone ahead and directly answered in the form of the code involved, where the chart max is mapped up, is the raising two to the power of a ceiling of a log base two of the maximum attempt count, which I think is to say unraveling. If you're looking at the maximum number, I'm not great at Vanna Whiting this thing, if you look at the maximum number in our poll, it's asking what's the log base two of that? So as it crosses different powers of two, then that rescales it. And yes, yes is the answer. What a fantastically apropos question. Thank you, Karen. All right, so answers are still rolling in. And I think, like I said, I just want to give you some more time to think this through because it looks like a big pile of algebra, plug in some numbers to see what seems to work well and see which answer fits. OK, so even if you are still thinking about it, I'm going to go ahead and grade it here and then start talking about why it's true and then also why we should care why this is an operation that actually tells us something. So the correct answer, which it looks like around 1700 of you got, congratulations, is log base C of B times log base B of A is equal to log base C of A. Great. Now that's just a big old pile of things. Why would that be true? How do we think about it? Now phase one, like I said, we might plug in an example, but let's try to actually think about why the example holds. So let me pull out. We've got this as one more of the log rules. This is just repeating what the correct answer turned out to be, where we've got an expression for log base C of B, log base B of A, and this ends up being log base C of A. It's gotten rid of the Bs, which is kind of interesting. So some examples you might plug in here would be things like, let's use a different color. Let's use green. Instead of C, I'm going to go ahead and plug in 10. Log base 10 of 100, which is kind of asking how many times does 10 go into 100 in a multiplicative sense? How many times do I multiply 10 by itself to get to 100? Well, the answer is two. And then log of 100 of, let's plug in another power of 10. It'll be nice if it's also a power of 100. So I'll do a million. So this one is asking 100 to the what equals a million. How many times do I multiply 100 by itself to get to a million? How many times does 100 go into a million? Phrasing the same thing 10 different ways. Now the claim is that this is the same thing as taking log base 10 of a million. That if I ask how many times does 10 go into 100, and how many times does 100 go into a million, multiplying those should give me the answer to how many times 10 goes into a million. Now just checking the numbers, this certainly works. 10 goes into 100 two times. 100 goes into a million three times in a multiplicative sense, in that 100 cubed is equal to a million. And indeed, how many times does 10 go into a million? Well, six. Now we can think of this property in terms of the corresponding exponent rule, which is going to look a little bit stranger, but it's actually just saying entirely the same thing. So here, if we have a base of c and a base of b, and we're trying to relate those to each other, the whole statement is equal to saying that suppose that b to the x is equal to a. Got some number b, you raise it to some number x and it equals a. Suppose it's also the case that c to the y equals b. Those two together are the same as saying c to the xy equals a. Now that's kind of a mouthful to say out loud, but if you plug in some numbers to translate what all of that is really saying in the context of the example we just did, saying if you can write 100 as 10 squared, and if you can write a million as 100 cubed, well that lets you write a million in terms of a power of 10. So sort of asking this question, how many times does one number go into another, but letting you layer it on top of each other. Now if we rearrange that expression, we get what is probably the second most important of all of our log rules. The most important is this top one, that when you multiply the inputs, you add the outputs. But the second most important, which is known as the change of base formula, lets us write that if you want the log base b of some value a, then for whatever c you want, it doesn't actually matter what log you have in your pocket. If you use that other log, and you take the log c of a, divided by the log c of b, that gives you log base b of a. So just as an example here, what this would look like, is let's say I wanted to be able to compute log base 100 of things. I just really want to. It's not a button on my calculator, but I would love to be able to do it. And I want to do it with an input like a million. Well even if I don't have the log base 100 button on my calculator, what I can do is say I'll use the log base 10 button and evaluate what's on the inside here, which at least positionally it's kind of above the 100. It has a higher altitude as we write it. So this can line up with the notation a little bit, that it sits on the numerator. And on the bottom, I use the log base 10 button that's in my calculator on the base, on the 100. And then I can evaluate both of those and it'll give me the answer. In this case it gets you 6 divided by 2, which will be 3. And if we really just think through what this is saying, I know I've said it many different times, but it's a convoluted enough way to write things, but an intuitive enough fact that I think just coming at it from a bunch of different angles can be important. Because like I said, this is probably the second most important log rule. We're asking how many times does 100 go into a million? In a multiplicative sense, how many times do I multiply by itself? But division is asking that same question in an additive sense. If I say how many times does the log of 100 go into the log of a million, that's what division means. It's saying how many times do I add this bottom number to itself to get to the top. But anything additive in the logarithm realm is the same as anything multiplicative in terms of what's inside the parentheses. So both of the left-hand side and the right-hand side are just saying how many times does 100 go into a million, but going about that in different ways. So this is extremely nice because it actually lets us compute things. Next time we're going to talk all about the natural logarithm, which is log base e, often written ln. And turns out, this is much easier to compute. There's nice math behind it such that if you want to come up with an algorithm that your calculator can use, it's actually a lot easier to think of log base e of numbers. So any time that you need to, go to some kind of calculator. I don't know, let's say we popped over to something like Desmos, always happy to have as a friend, and you wanted to compute log base 10 of some number. Let's say we're doing log base 10 of 57. And it looks like that's, you know, it should make sense it's between 1 and 2 because 57 was between 10 and 100. What's going on under the hood? How is it actually figuring this out? It's going to use somewhere in there a change of base formula, which is going to be that the natural log of 57 divided by the natural log of 10 is the same thing. These are two different ways of writing it. So if you know one logarithm, you know all of the logarithms. And well, let's just use that fact to answer one more of our quiz questions. This will be the second to last quiz question. So thank you all for sticking it through. I think we will be, I think you'll be pleased by the last question because the last question will actually be like a fun problem solving, puzzling thing. And it'll involve a lot of what we've used up to this point, kind of a culminating thing. So before that, though, just to make sure that we've got the instincts of change of base down, what do we have? Use the approximation that log base 2 of 10 is around 10 thirds. So using that approximation, which of the following is approximately true? Log base 2 of x is about 10 thirds of log base 10 of x. Log base 2 of x is log base 10 of 10 thirds of x. Log base 2 of x is log base 10 of x to the power 10 thirds. Or log base 2 of x is 10 thirds times the log base 10 of x. And finally, none of the above. So I'll give you a moment to think about that. You might want to think to the chart that we were drawing earlier and thinking about log base 2 and log base 10 as we're looking at powers of 1000 and how each of those grows. That can leverage some of the intuition. But I'll let you think about it. Stop talking. While answers are rolling in, it looks like a number of people have been asking on Twitter about basically how complex numbers play into this. So we've got Jamil asking, what if the base is imaginary? We've got Kalkan asking, what about complex bases? Wouldn't z to the x is walking around the spiral? Wouldn't it hit every complex number? Well, it won't hit every complex number. But your instinct that it's hitting multiple things is pretty spot on. Doesn't make sense to talk about logs with imaginary numbers by Nitya. So to all of these questions, it's actually a very nuanced question. The short answer is yes, complex logarithms absolutely exist. But each one of them has multiple different outputs. So a good analogy here is how if we have the square root function, if I ask something like the square root of 5, you know, we have the convention that you always do the positive amount, but that doesn't quite feel honest. It feels like the right answer is to specify that there's two different outputs for the square root function, two solutions to x squared equals 25. And this is actually true in complex numbers as well. One of the things we talked about in a complex number lecture was that you can take the square root of i and you actually get root 2 over 2 plus root 2 over 2 i. But that there's two solutions. You can do plus or minus this value. And so you could say that the square root function isn't a function, but it's a multi-valued function. It always has two different outputs. Now something funky happens when we have exponents at play. So if you're just like someone who hasn't seen this stuff, don't worry, we talked about it in previous lectures. I'm obviously jumping around on the complexity level a lot here where if in lecture 5 I'm talking about like Euler's formula with complex numbers and compound interest and like how that plays into physics, and then lecture 6 we're back to the basics of logarithms. I acknowledge that might be a little bit jarring to potential audience members. But just continuing on with the answer. If you note that e to the 2 pi times some number times i, this basically walks you around a circle so that the output will walk around a circle and just keep repeating as n goes from 0 up to 1, it'll walk around one cycle and end up back where you started. As n goes from 1 to 2, you'll end up back where you started. So for example e to the 0 sits here, e to the i pi is at negative 1, but e to the 2 pi i is also at 1. Same with e to the 4 pi i, that also equals 1. So in general if you wanted to ask something like what is the log base e of 1, you know on the one hand we want to say the log base anything of 1 should be 0 because anything to the power 0 equals that 1. But if we're letting complex numbers into the mix you would have to honestly say well 2 pi i is another pretty good answer to this question because e to the 2 pi i also equals 1. And same with 4 pi i. And you could even go in the negative direction. And in general n times pi times 2 times i, kind of wrote that in a weird order, for any integer n feels like a valid answer to this question. So there's a couple ways that you can deal with that in math. And before we get back to our usual lesson just on logarithm rules, this is interesting enough, I kind of want to pull it up. Let's see if we have complex logarithm. Great, Wikipedia always to our aid. Probably it'll have a nice like visual of some kind for us. Oh look, such fancy color diagrams. What I want, okay this is what I want, wonderful. Let's zoom out a little bit. Great. So there's this notion of what's called a Riemann surface that's basically trying to capture the idea that you have a function with multiple outputs. And intuitively maybe you can understand what it's getting at where the input would be something on the xy plane and the output, there's just many different outputs sitting there. So when you have a complex logarithm you have to account for that. But it's used, it's actually a very useful idea to do, but it takes a lot more nuance than you might expect. So with all of that, hopefully that helped at least partially answer some of people's questions. Same by the way with logarithms with base negative numbers, because if you're asking like negative one to the x and really noodling on what that means, it gets you into the realm of complex numbers so you have to deal with the same multiple output idea. Now answers are rolling in more slowly so this seems like a fine time to grade things. And the answer turns out to be you rescale it. If you want to go from log base 2 of something to log base 10 of something it involves rescaling. And one way you could think about this is with the change of base formula. So let's say we have, let's get rid of our e stuff. Let's say you have log base 2 of x. But we want to write it in terms of log base 10. We can write that as log base 10 of x divided by log base 10 of 2. Saying how many times does 2 go into x in a multiplicative sense is the same as saying how many times does the log of 2 go into the log of x in an additive sense. And well what is 1 divided by the log base 10 of 2? So we're going to keep our log base 10 of x out here. And from what we found earlier we found that log base 10 of 2 was approximately 0.3. So when we divide by it that should give us 10 thirds. And this lines up with what we were looking at a little bit earlier with powers of 1000. Let's see where was it? Where was it? Great. So when we're converting from log base 10 of something up to log base 2, you know here we were thinking of multiplying the top by 0.3 to get to the bottom. But you could also think of multiplying by 10 thirds to get to the top. Anytime you have log base 10 of some number you just rescale it and you have log base 2 of that number. And the rescaling constant comes from the log base 2 of 10. Or vice versa, log base 10 of 2. So that's change of base. Like I said it's very important. It lets you put everything into a nice universal language. And that should be all of the hint that you need for the last question which is a challenge question on this one. So if anyone's been watching and they've been like I know logarithms, I've got this completely down. Let me pull up the last question which came up on, let's see it's not the AMC but it's whatever the predecessor to the AMC was I believe. So it's going to involve a little cleverness and manipulation. We've got this long sequence of fractions. You take 1 divided by the log base 2 of 100 factorial. And remember 100 factorial is 100 times 99 times 98 all the way down to 1. So 1 divided by the log base 2 of that. Plus 1 divided by the log base 3 of 100 factorial. Plus 1 divided by the log base 4 of 100 factorial on and on and on. Up until 1 divided by the log base 100 of 100 factorial. So this looks rather intimidating, right? Certainly adding fractions is never fun. Adding 100 fractions seems even worse. Dealing with a bunch of logs of different bases seems like a pain. The factorial is playing into this. So I'm just going to give you, you know, given that this is the wind down time, I'm going to give you 2 or 3 minutes to start thinking about this. And if you don't get it, it's totally fine. We're going to walk through what the answer is, but I'm just going to let people think about this final challenge question before we call it a day. So I'm going to give you a little bit more time. I'm on this one because it's definitely fun to work out. And I think if you know how to start, then great. But if you don't know how to start, just letting yourself kind of work with a couple of the different rules that we've worked out before. Change of base comes into play if you'd like to use that. And just kind of keep manipulating and if it feels like you're getting something that's a little too messy, see if you come at it from a different angle. And because answers are rolling in a little bit more slowly now, what I'm going to do is just start to describe the explanation here and then come back to grade it in just a moment here. So the expression that we have looks like, I just started writing it out while you guys were working on it, 1 divided by log base 2 of 100 factorial plus 1 divided by log base 3 of 100 factorial. And before you even start, the fact that the thing on the inside of the log involves a big product of stuff should actually feel good, because logs like to take in things that look like products because of the most important property that we have, which is the idea that it turns products into addition. So right away you know that you're probably going to use that. Second thing you notice is that it's uncomfortable to have all of these different bases, log base 2 of something, log base 3 of something, log base 100 of something. So translating it all into the common language should be helpful. How does change of base work? Well asking how many times does 2 go into 100 factorial is the same as asking how many times does the log of 2 divide into the log of 100 factorial. It doesn't even matter what logarithm you use. This log could be base 10, base e, base 2, doesn't matter, this change of base formula still holds. Now what that means for our expression is instead of taking 1 divided by log base 2 of 100 factorial, I could write that as log of 2 divided by, so let me draw a little dividing line between what I'm doing here, log of 2 divided by log of 100 factorial. And then similarly log of 3 divided by log of 100 factorial. So all I'm doing here is taking the reciprocal, so instead of taking log of 100 factorial over log of 2, I've inverted it, log of 2 over 100 factorial, because that's what this reciprocal is doing. So with that as the beginning, I'm going to go ahead and just grade this, lock in the answers and see how everyone's doing. So it looks like, awesome, around 1796, we always draw a little bit north of Ramanuja and John's number, around 1800 of you answered that it's 1, which is correct, congratulations. 70 of you answered 100, which we can maybe see where that error would have come from. Those of you that answered 0, that's interesting, it would imply that somehow you have cancellation at play, because these are all positive numbers, so thinking one of them was negative, so you could probably gut check against the idea that it would be 0. 41 of you want me to come up with a number fun numerical fact about 69, but I won't. 28 of you said 2, and I think, yeah, I think that's, I think the difference between 1 and 100 maybe would be interesting to try to analyze. But if we go back to our answer, I realize it may be a little bit confusing how I've written this, this isn't, this is not a big fraction, this was just a dividing line between, ironically trying not to confuse my fractions with each other. So rewriting our expression up on the top here. As we add all of these things, and we can continue up until log of 100, all divided by log of 100 factorial, the key is that now all of the denominators are the same, so we can add the numerators, no more plus sign, it's just going to equal something, that top is going to look like log of 2 plus log of 3 plus on and on up to log of 100, all divided by the log of 100 factorial, and it seems like the only little contention among those answering the question is whether this should simplify to be 1 or should it simplify to be 100. And really the way we can think about this is to just break down that bottom part in terms of what a factorial means. I'll go ahead and do this on the bottom part since I didn't manage my paper real estate very effectively here. The log of 100 times 99 times 98 on and on times 2 times 1 is the same as adding all of them. And you can probably see this mostly cancels out with the top. The only question you might have though is that in the factorial we keep multiplying down until we get that 1, which doesn't really make a difference, but before you think about it too much you might wonder, hang on, on the bottom I'm multiplying everything and I'm adding this log of 1, but on the top from what we found before I never saw that log of 1, does that make any difference? And the answer is no, because log of 1 is saying 10 to the power of what equals 1, and the answer is 0. So in fact, taking the log of 100 factorial is the same as adding the logs of all the numbers from 2 up to 100 and it simplifies down to 1. So to those of you who got it, congratulations. To those of you who feel like you maybe have better intuitions for change of base formulas for the fact that logarithms turn multiplication into addition, that's my hope. In the next time, with this as a foundation of logarithms that can be pointed back to, what I would love to talk about is what's known as the natural logarithm, log base e. And try to give an instinct for why that's something that we care about. Why is it that mathematicians just seem to really love the number e sitting in the base of their logarithms? What does that buy for them? Why does it show up in nature? So that will happen on Friday at the same time as this lecture, and I look forward to seeing everyone there.