Has it ever bothered you how with exponents, logs, and roots, we have three completely different types of notation to write the same fact?
If you write 2 cubed equals 8, it's the relative position of the 3 over the 2 that indicates the operation.
But when you write the cube root of 8 equals 2, which is the same fact, you introduce this new squiggly radical symbol.
And then writing log base 2 of 8 equals 3, again the same fact, you write out a word for the operation.
This weird discrepancy in notation isn't just counterintuitive, I think it's counter-mathematical.
Rather than making seemingly different facts look the same, which is what math should do, it makes three facts that should obviously be the same look artificially different.
I came across a really nice suggestion on math stack exchange for a more symmetric notation here.
In our example, the way this would work is you write a triangle with a 2 in the lower left, a 3 on the top, and an 8 on the lower right.
To express the operation 2 cubed, you remove that bottom right corner, and the symbol as a whole represents the value that should go in that missing corner.
To express log base 2 of 8, which is asking the question 2 to the what equals 8, what you do is remove the top number.
Again, the symbol as a whole represents the value that should go in that missing corner.
You can guess the third case.
If you want to express the cube root of 8, you remove the lower left corner.
Once again, the symbol as a whole represents the value that should go in the missing corner.
This much more clearly expresses the relationship of all three operations.
The definition alone is mildly pleasing, but where it becomes useful is in seeing how the rules for exponentiation logs and radicals are all really the same.
The most extreme example might be how with our current notation, there are six, six distinct ways to express the various inverse operations, and it looks like a complete mess.
If you use the triangle of power, all of these operations follow the same basic aesthetic pattern.
Admittedly, it looks a little bit weird when your brain has already been trained with the traditional notation, but our brains are really good at picking up on patterns.
And in this case, once you get used to it a little, you only need to remember one pattern which unlocks all six of these cases.
Essentially, any rule that's associated with exponents logs and radicals becomes essentially three times faster to learn and to recognize.
If you have a pencil and paper, I highly encourage you to just take a moment and mess around with what some of these rules for exponents look like.
It's weird at first when you're trained with the traditional notation, but it's super satisfying once it all clicks.